Applying Practice, Analyzing Situations, and Learning How to Learn
 
What I see often, when hearing complaints or confusion, is a remarkable absence in the understanding of both the time, effort, dedication, and focus required to improve at any specific pursuit and the sacrifices and realizations one must come to when breaching skill barriers, consistency walls, and overcoming one's own flaws. When people try to learn, they do something- maybe a lot- and then expect results. Essentially, this is expecting a reward while inputting no effort. The concept of what constitutes “effort”, “dedication”, or “time investment” varies widely as each individual has put their own personal amount of time or study in for their particular field and some individuals learn much faster than others. However, I believe this is a fundamental misunderstanding of an unfixable trait- as in, slow learners will always be slow learners- and this is just not the case.

Think of a subject you dislike. Why do you dislike it? A main answer might be that it’s boring, but usually, it involved a bad teacher in their past. A single bad maths teacher will ruin a child’s interest in maths for the rest of their life in some cases, and a boring history teacher will make dates more dull than the news. With games, we have a unique situation where there is no particular institute for teaching one how to play in the early stages- when you are learning sports as a child, you had a coach. Music, an instructor. Driving takes one on one instruction for many hours before they will hand you a license. So why do so few players seek coaching in gaming?

Firstly comes from ego, or ignorance, or simply playing the game for entertainment. It is a game, after all. So we must first disregard the potential that it is being played solely for fun, as that defeats the entire purpose of analyzing one's learning style within a game or within practice. If you shrug at any of this document and think, “well, I’m not THAT serious” then this is not important to you, but should you ever want to seek advancement in gaming or eSports, these things are mandatory, but often unsaid. Very few people in this world can learn by themselves, and even they are influenced by everything around them.

Tying in with the previous statement, coaching such a new industry (yes, 20-30 years is very new, considering how long we’ve had to get experienced coaches in any other field and how they have established themselves in a self-revolving system of students and coaches) is very risky. There are not many professional teams; and in many cases scenes where it is not professional play are almost neglected. Money drives this, since if there is no money, there is no surviving in the field. It doesn’t matter how exceptional or how talented one is, if you can’t pay rent or buy food, the best (you name it) player in the world may well go work at McDonalds instead, since a steady income is much easier and less prone to mood swings of the spectators. McDonalds will be around for a while; Overwatch will not. However, that doesn’t mean those skills are useless, as there will always be a “next thing”. In recent times eSports have gotten more organized, known, and funded, and colleges are very active in setting up eSports divisions and collegiate teams, though their quality varies widely.

When you follow the line of “well, I’m not THAT serious”, then $10 for coaching is too much. If I charged $10 for coaching, I’m going to invest more time than I would at a real workplace trying to help you and let you skip many steps in a process that many of us learned the hard way. That’s less than minimum wage where I live, and I’m sure it will go for 1.5 or 2 hours too. With that comes the lack of trust in who to pay or who knows what, or whether you respect them or you are desperate to move up another skill level. I’ve had my own students show me “coaching” they received from paid sites, which was unhelpful, short, and rude, as if they watched the vod on their second monitor and threw a couple snippets of obvious criticisms their way with the title of “top 500 offtank player”. Such schemes lower the credibility of education, but education is an exploitable business, as it is about teaching the ignorant- so a great amount of care must be had when exposing a student to education, as a poor experience will, as mentioned previously, ruin their appetite for further learning. Many players and students get stuck this way, or never return to education, expecting no one to be able to help them. As eSports is new, there are very few credible educators willing to risk it for a new industry, and succeeding is mostly luck or contacts instead of experience.

So then, how does one learn if they have all of that to consider when trying to seek information? Simply put, don’t think of gaming as something frivolous when you want to invest time in it. Take it seriously. Not so seriously that you stop having fun, or find no fun in the result or experience, or hurt yourself (though, this is often commonplace anyway, even with warning or an understanding of the dangers). Would you accept music lessons from a text-only service that sends only a few lines of suggestions in a non-live session? Of course not, even not for $20. That’s worthless. Many of the experienced players nowadays are young, also, and have very little teaching experience or even life experience. You can ask them how something is done, and they may give a satisfactory answer, but rarely will a player know the technical how, only the why. While this makes sense to other experienced players, it is missing an important point in the structure of skill and decision-making. Many, many things go into each decision made during a game or even just a day in the life, many of which those players never considered or forgot about long ago. The actions become automatic, and the situations become repeated. You do this or that, because that’s the right thing to do, or that leads to success. Yes, that is the basic action -> resolution, but to really understand and analyze a decision you must consider the cause -> processing -> reaction -> resolution -> consequence. What will eventually become a 2 step process, or even a one step, starts as a five or more step process, and as you condense these points in a decision the reasonings for them become much more clear, and your motivation for accomplishing them correctly will see a significant rise.

In the next few pages I will break down this process into steps so the reader can see how these steps meld together to result in skill. The why is obvious: to win, to outplay. The how is harder to perceive, as it can be as simple as “hit a target”, or as complex as “delay peeking 8.4 seconds as the other player spawned and will return to their post at this time, and based on previous engagements, will post up in this particular way, so I have an advantage if I engage approx. after that timeframe.” Or even more complex, when is the time to do nothing.
Now, one may think, “is this just game sense or training time?”, and the answer is yes it is those things, but much more and much less. A sharp player, who understands how to analyze an action on the fly, can adapt their playstyle instantly to a change of environment. Players attempt to increase their “muscle memory” thinking it will allow them to achieve consistency in the same situations, failing to realize they do not understand the situations to begin with and that any more difficult situation, or even just a different angle or peek, will confuse the player and they will fall back to blaming their “consistency” or “muscle memory”. Such end results are nonsense, and are equivalent to skill in general. If you are reliant on your specific movements to succeed, then your range of success is extremely limited. An adaptable player (and humans are the most adaptable creature on the planet) that refuses to adapt is just fodder. Teaching adaptation and identifying weak points and strong points in your or your opponent’s side is very difficult, and requires direct instruction from a teacher who will go over and show precisely how a situation occurred. In this guide I do not care about what happens in the situation; I don’t care how well you executed an engagement or how poorly you failed it, simply identifying and analyzing pieces of the engagement and then concluding in how to either repeat that success, or avoid that failure in the future. The first step is to…
 
cause -> processing -> reaction -|> resolution -> consequence
                
Understand the cause of the event. Do not assume there is malicious intent from your teammates, “throwing”, cheaters, etc. Such excuses for a failed situation are unhelpful. In most cases, it is the ignorance of the player in not understand this exact cause where they misname the cause, and then assume they are also responsible for the consequence when they themselves failed all four previous steps, and were confused on why the result was unfavorable. You can’t just look at your own actions for this, however, as you must consider all the other players as well and their motivations and goals in knowing how the resolution of the event came to be after the reaction. Processing a situation, after identifying the cause, can also be difficult since the causes and consequences of an engagement happen rapidly and in the scale of seconds to milliseconds. If your processing speed is low, then your reaction will be delayed, but this comes at a minimum processing requirement and directly competing skillset known as patience. If your reaction time is low, then you may not well get a chance to use your reaction, since the opportunity passed as you were preparing to act. If you skip the processing step, then your reaction will be randomly beneficial or detrimental. In understanding this process, one wants to come to the complete streamline of these steps and the processing and reaction should happen faster than the cause itself. At best, the priority of what steps should occur faster and be automatic are below.

Reaction > Cause > Processing
 
A good player will continue to reduce the processing time until it is negligible or methodical, and the steps should not be noticeable. In amateur play, you can see these steps easily, and the effects different processing inputs have on different player’s psychological states. Here, fear, confidence, “popoff”¸ skill, form, and experience all are made apparent in just one or two actions a player makes, and one can easily tell from the reaction and the processing speed exactly how skilled and experienced a player is. You will see a skilled, but past their time, player process things faster than they react to it, while a more spry player may react faster than they can correctly process. Here, the misunderstanding of “consistency” becomes a topic. The reaction to a stimulus will always be the same unless you change your understanding and viewpoint on the stimulus to a degree where the processing time is delayed, as it is trying to apply new known skills, but the reaction will be much more effective than if you relied entirely on reflexes which are not meant to be relied on except for urgent survival. They make the same reaction to a situation, then wonder why the consistency level has not risen from before; aptly called the definition of insanity. No two situations are the same, so one must throw consistency out the window and strive for adaptability instead. It doesn’t matter how good you are at hitting a target strafing in front of you if they never leave cover, and your skill is useless if you don’t know how to exploit their positioning or take your own positioning to do the same. A great disappointment sets in on your practice not paying off as the situations ingame are very different from training bots, training games, aim trainers, or guides and documents. Such situations are varied, dynamic, and if one expects the same stimulus and receives something greatly different or unexpected, the surprise GREATLY increases the processing and reaction times of the above system. So much so that even if one has successfully completed the chart in a million other situations, this one defeat will seem confusing and random. So then, how do you transcend the system? How do you identify these “correct” causes and process them in a way that won’t cause confusion or delay and react in a way that results in a favorable consequence?

Here is where the analysis of situations comes in. People are very predictable, but only when you know their motivations and knowledge level. At the highest level, this predictability becomes a much more intense and diverse fight, but at the lower level it can be hard to separate “unpredictability” from “amateurism”. An unpredictable player is skilled, knowledgeable, and can analyze their opponents and exploit their weaknesses. An amateur player does things the experienced player wouldn’t expect, and doesn’t have the same fear or confidence in the same locations, which can seem unpredictable but not effective in any long measure. The unpredictable player will outplay another the majority of the time, while an amateur may get lucky once. This luck must not be mistaken for improvement or outplay, as in any game or event where there is more than one single instance of competitive teamfight, there will be more than one resolution and consequence. This is what balances these instances of random, amateur beginner’s luck. In both cases, they are still predictable, in a special way. It becomes more difficult to predict, but not impossible. One may know that an amateur player tends to wander through a particular area, and exploit it, and once that is understood, the amateur player will never overcome that obstacle unless they are able to apply this same system and understand how to change the consequences of their actions in their favor instead of being exploited into unfavorable ones.

Thus, the goal of this is to teach the player how to teach themselves in regards to understanding the consequences of actions and adjusting one's play to suit it. While the META in Overwatch at the time of writing seems to contradict this understanding (and an inexperienced player would not understand these differences, reasonably, but sometimes in a way that they don’t want to accept) as the input and consequences are very solid and well understood, this is simply because people whom are much better at this process than I am, and practice it daily and study what the best reactions to different causes are, determined that this was the most favorable course of action after processing the available information. Not all information is ingame, and one goes into every match, scrimmage or competitive, and must process the most likely win scenario for their team and the other team. At this step also, many players undervalue or disregard components or strengths of their team or the consideration that the other team is in the same straits, and conclude that the consequence was unavoidable and their reaction was unneeded, since a reaction that has no potential favorable outcome is self-destructive.

At every step of learning and playing, this process comes into play, and when I try to understand a new topic or situation, I make sure not to fool myself on any of these steps and try to be as realistic as possible with my expectations and assumptions. There are certainly autoloss and auto win situations, and such situations can flip at the onset of an unexpected cause or consequence (such as a disconnect, team infighting, fatigue, etc), but identifying these potential situations and the causes for them and whether those causes can be remedied or better cared for is the key here. Do not think of “how can I best engage the enemy” or “if my team would support me better, we would win”, as those are foolish, and a mistake from the first by skipping steps and not accepting what you are responsible for, and what you need to do to help your team help you, and vice versa. If you don’t know how your team supports you properly, and simply reduce it to “healing” “tanking” “peel”, etc, then you cannot properly criticize the issue, and your criticisms will be ignored or result in arguments or morale problems. As a team, the team wants to win. That is the first prerequisite. If the team or player does not want to win, skip to the consequences step and understand the cause is your own base motivations for playing the game. Many players will try to tag the “do not want to win” title on teams that don’t deserve it, or are trying their best with what is given to them. Often, teammates simply don’t know or don’t care to support teammates who don’t seem to be giving beneficial consequences when reactions occur. With this I can move into the first example and thought problem:
“After two team fights, our main tank player, who seems experienced and on their role, continues to fail in the engagement.
